Release notes v0.4.0 (#418)
grafana/xk6-browser: release notes/v0.4.0.md

xk6-browser v0.4.0 is here! :tada:

In this minor release, we implemented a large portion of the Locator API, fixed critical bugs, and made some improvements and code refactoring!

## New features

- Implemented `page.locator(selector)` ([#310](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/310))

  This will create and return a new page locator given a selector with strict mode on (only select a single element that matches and if there are multiple matches an error is returned). Check below for what can be done with the locator.

> - Added `locator.click([options])` which allows an unique element to be clicked ([#318](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/318))

Author: Happy to do that. @inancgumus could you please supply the body of the description and the small example? I can then remove the details and just have a more concise list of the features that were implemented for this new API.

> - Added `locator.click([options])` which allows an unique element to be clicked ([#318](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/318))

Reviewer: Sure. After you finish all the requested changes, I'll fix this by sending another commit to this PR.

> - Added `locator.click([options])` which allows an unique element to be clicked ([#318](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/318))

Reviewer 2: @inancgumus I did some restructuring of the Locator API section. It was faster to do it myself than point things out in comments. So let me know how it looks.

> - Added `locator.click([options])` which allows an unique element to be clicked ([#318](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/318))

Reviewer: Makes sense! Thanks for the restructuring, it looks better :thumbsup:  I'd like to change this (`Hold modifier key (e.g. Shift) now works when working with keyboard.down and keyboard.up. (#325)`) to the conventional `Fixed ...` format if you have stopped working on the release notes?

> - Added `locator.click([options])` which allows an unique element to be clicked ([#318](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/318))

Reviewer: > So it might be confusing, but proper sentences should have periods. List items and headers don't need to. :)

Good call 👍 I was indecisive about it. It's better [this way]([a1afa7d](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/418/commits/a1afa7d07efce27ebb889f71b46c02f8e114eab7)).

- Added `locator.inputValue` will return the text inputted in an input field ([#395](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/395))

- Added `locator.selectOption` will select the given option in a select element ([](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/397))

- Added `locator.press` which will "push" the specified keyboard key ([#398](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/398))

- Added `locator.type` which will "type" the text into the input element ([#399](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/399))

- Added `locator.hover` which will bring into view the selected element ([#400](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/400))

- Added `locator.tap` which will bring the into view the selected element and tap on it ([#401](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/401))

- Added `locator.dispatchEvent` which will dispatch the specified event to the selected element ([#405](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/405))

- Added `locator.waitFor` which will wait for the element selected to meet the specified state ([#406](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/406))

## Bugs fixed

> - Fixed zombie browser processes. Before this fix, browser processes remained active even after the test or k6 test runs. This was especially noticeable when running it locally, sometimes saturating the machine and so affecting the test results ([#306](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/306))

Author: Sure will remove that bit.

I removed the periods as that was what was suggested and that is what it is like in other release notes

> - Fixed zombie browser processes. Before this fix, browser processes remained active even after the test or k6 test runs. This was especially noticeable when running it locally, sometimes saturating the machine and so affecting the test results ([#306](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/306))

Reviewer 2: The only one I see without periods is v0.1.3, all others have them, so let's follow the more recent convention. In any case, it makes sense to properly finish the sentence, so if anything we did it incorrectly in v0.1.3.

> - Fixed zombie browser processes. Before this fix, browser processes remained active even after the test or k6 test runs. This was especially noticeable when running it locally, sometimes saturating the machine and so affecting the test results ([#306](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/306))

Author: Oh! I just noticed what i missed. I'll make the change and add the period back in before the PR#xxx 🙂

> 

Reviewer: Well paraphrased :)

  Previously the modifier key push wasn't being registered at all.

- Fixed `page.content()` so that it no longer panics ([#327](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/327))

- Fixed timeout detection ([#411](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/411))

  Before this fix, we couldn't detect the timeouts properly. For example if we write a test where we are retrieving the contents of an element that doesn't exist, it used to return an empty string, but now it will raise a timeout error correctly. The current system is still unstable because this fix re-surfaced a data race bug that happens from time to time (happens on frame navigation). Previously reported in #254.

- Fixed `tap` on `elementHandle`. Before, it was performing the tap in the wrong part of the element ([#401](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/401))

- Fixed `fill` on `elementHandle`. Before, it wasn't filling in the text in the selected input element ([#383](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/383))

## Improvements

- Permissions can now be granted (such as microphone and camera) to the browser ([#314](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/314))

>   This grants the new browser window permissions that would then allow tests to use those devices. You can test the change using the example in [examples/grant_permission.js](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/commit/57ccb1c286e3b5fd1eb5e5d8d4109b6a3252e53f#diff-7b6083a9380e6052b6c853ab008d1993376ed01a45ed4254e1ab7e5748db8d38).

Author: Ok, so should i use?:
1. https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/commit/57ccb1c286e3b5fd1eb5e5d8d4109b6a3252e53f#diff-7b6083a9380e6052b6c853ab008d1993376ed01a45ed4254e1ab7e5748db8d38
2. https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/blob/eb136726e37282fffad0c642062a04a6680a6adc/examples/grant_permission.js

>   This grants the new browser window permissions that would then allow tests to use those devices. You can test the change using the example in [examples/grant_permission.js](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/commit/57ccb1c286e3b5fd1eb5e5d8d4109b6a3252e53f#diff-7b6083a9380e6052b6c853ab008d1993376ed01a45ed4254e1ab7e5748db8d38).

Reviewer 2: I think the second one (or even https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/blob/v0.4.0/examples/grant_permission.js), since it links to the file directly (checked out at a specific version), instead of as part of a commit with other changes.

- We're also removing the slow-motion option for `isChecked` on `frame` since it doesn't make sense to slow down this sort of check ([#376](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/376))

## Internals

> - The logger can be disabled in unit tests if we pass in a `nil` logger ([#310](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/310))

Reviewer 2: I'm leaving this unresolved as a reminder for us to upgrade.

- Added `locator.hover` which will bring into view the selected element ([#400](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/400))

- Added `locator.tap` which will bring the into view the selected element and tap on it ([#401](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/401))

- Added `locator.dispatchEvent` which will dispatch the specified event to the selected element ([#405](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/405))

- Added `locator.waitFor` which will wait for the element selected to meet the specified state ([#406](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/406))

## Bugs fixed

- Fixed zombie browser processes. Before this fix, browser processes remained active even after the test or k6 test runs. This could sometimes saturate the machine and therefore could affect the tests ([#306](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/306))

- Fixed cleanup of the browser's temporary directory, so that it's properly removed when `Browser.close()` is called, or when the iteration or test run completes. ([#323](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/323), [#409](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/409))

>   This will help ensure that any private data that the browser caches to the temporary directory is deleted locally as well as when this is run in the cloud.

Reviewer 2: Let's not mention the Cloud yet, at least not in this section. So maybe:
```suggestion
  This will help ensure that any private data that the browser caches in the temporary directory is deleted.
```

- Fixed `ElementHandle.tap()`. Before, it was performing the tap in the wrong part of the element ([#401](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/401))

- Fixed `ElementHandle.fill()`. Before, it wasn't filling in the text in the selected input element ([#383](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/383))

## Improvements

- Permissions can now be granted (such as microphone and camera) to the browser ([#314](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/314))

  This grants the new browser window permissions that would then allow tests to use those devices. You can test the change using the example in [examples/grant_permission.js](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/commit/57ccb1c286e3b5fd1eb5e5d8d4109b6a3252e53f#diff-7b6083a9380e6052b6c853ab008d1993376ed01a45ed4254e1ab7e5748db8d38)

> - We're also removing the slow-motion option for `Frame.isChecked()` since it doesn't make sense to slow down this sort of check ([#376](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/376))

Reviewer 2: In the future we might want to have a separate Cloud section, but this is fine for now.

```suggestion
- We're also removing the slow-motion option for `Frame.isChecked()` since it doesn't make sense to slow down this sort of check ([#376](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/376))

- We're working on making xk6-browser available in the k6 Cloud! The feature is still in early testing stages, but we hope to make more announcements about it soon. Stay tuned!
```

## Internals

- Upgraded k6 dependency to [v0.39.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/releases/tag/v0.39.0)

- The logger can be disabled in unit tests if we pass in a `nil` logger ([#310](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/310))

- Removed unused dependency modules ([#317](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/317))

- Added an env var to skip flaky tests such as `TestWaitForFrameNavigationWithinDocument` ([#333](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/333))

- Refactored locator tests to run in parallel to reduce the time it takes to run all the tests ([#389](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/389))

> - Removed unnecessary call `stdout.Close` that was creating noise in the logs ([#419](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/419))

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need to mention this, since it's a fix for a regression introduced post-v0.3.0, so users wouldn't notice a difference.

xk6-browser v0.4.0 is here! :tada:

> This is a minor release with some bug fixes, a large portion of the `locator` feature implemented, improvements and code refactoring!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this minor release, we implemented a large portion of the Locator API, fixed critical bugs, and made some improvements and code refactoring!
```

## New features

> - Implement `page.locator(selector)` ([#310](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/310)).

Reviewer: Can we use the past-participle as we used to do in previous release documents?

"Implement-ed" vs "Implement". Also, for the others.

We use the following formatting (notice the dot (not a biggie, but 😅):

```diff
- Implemented `X` ([#000]()).
+ Implemented `X`. ([#000]())
```

  This will create and return a new page locator given a selector with strict mode on (only select a single element that matches and if there are multiple matches an error is returned). Check below for what can be done with the locator.

- Add `locator.click([options])` which allows an unique element to be clicked ([#318](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/318)).

- Add `locator.dblclick([options])` which double clicks on a uniquely identifiable element ([#332](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/332)).

- Add `locator.check` which will check a uniquely identifiable check box ([#362](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/362)).

- Add `locator.uncheck` which will uncheck a uniquely identifiable check box ([#365](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/365)).

- Add `locator.isChecked` which will return `true` or `false` depending on whether the uniquely identifiable check box is checked or unchecked ([#369](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/369)).

> - Add `Add locator.isEditable` which will return `true` or `false` if an uniquely identifiable element on the page is editable (e.g. `<input>`) ([#372](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/372)).

Reviewer: Double "Add".

- Add `locator.inputValue` will return the text inputted in an input field ([#395](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/395)).

- Add `locator.selectOption` will select the given option in a select element ([](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/397)).

- Add `locator.press` which will "push" the specified keyboard key ([#398](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/398)).

- Add `locator.type` which will "type" the text into the input element ([#399](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/399)).

- Add `locator.hover` which will bring into view the selected element ([#400](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/400)).

- Add `locator.tap` which will bring the into view the selected element and tap on it ([#401](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/401)).

- Add `locator.dispatchEvent` which will dispatch the specified event to the selected element ([#405](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/405)).

- Add `locator.waitFor` which will wait for the element selected to meet the specified state ([#406](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/406)).

> ## Bugs fixed

Reviewer: #401's https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/commit/5e1eb9eb930e3b0ebcffe097eb115ad2604de217 is missing.

#382 is missing.

Author: - #401 is in the New Features section
- #382 is covered by the PR#383 and is in the New Features section

Author: - #401 is in New Features
- #382 is covered by #383 in New Features

Author: - https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/401 is in New Features
- https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/issues/382 is covered by https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/383 in New Features

Author: - https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/401 is in New Features
- https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/issues/382 is covered by https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/383 in New Features

Reviewer: Ah, OK. But, there was also a bug fix for `ElementHandle.Tap`. I think we should put it in the bug fixes section—it wasn't working before. People should know about it.

#383: Yep, I know, sorry, I misphrased it 🤦 I mean to put it in the bug section as well.

> - Fix zombie browser processes by closing browser processes when the context is canceled ([#306](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/306)).

Reviewer: We need to rephrase it from the user's language. They don't know anything about a `context`.

- Fix so that the browser's temporary directory is cleaned up once the test completes ([#323](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/323), [#409](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/409)).

  There is a small chance that the temporary directory will not be cleaned and a ticket has been opened to track the next step/fix ([#403](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/issues/403)).

- Hold modifier key (e.g. `Shift`) now works when working with `keyboard.down` and `keyboard.up` ([#325](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/325)).

- Fixed `page.content()` so that it no longer panics ([#327](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/327)).

> - Fix timeout detection (callApiWithTimeout) ([#411](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/411)).

Reviewer: We should explain the behavior change as described in the PR. There could be users who depend on this behavior.

It'd be better to explain it in the users' language. They won't understand anything about `callApiWithTimeout`.

> ## Improvements

Reviewer: Slow-motion removals are missing (behavioral change). For example https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/commit/491d5da0112060b4c9a8b488df12c85acc5c2bdf. Those are tracked in #234.

- Grant permissions (such as microphone and camera) to the browser ([#314](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/314)).

>   This grants the new browser window permissions that would then allow tests to use those devices. You can test the change using the example in `examples/grant_permission.js`.

Reviewer: You can use a link to this file (using the specific commit).

xk6-browser v0.4.0 is here! :tada:

> In this minor release, we implemented a large portion of a new API that will help you find elements on a page in a more robust way, fixed critical bugs, and made some improvements and code refactoring!

Reviewer 2: WDYT? I think it should be prominent here at the start, otherwise it likely won't be read.

```suggestion
In this minor release, we implemented a large portion of a new API that will help you find elements on a page in a more robust way, fixed critical bugs, and made some improvements and code refactoring!

The team is aware that the extension is currently unstable for many users. This stems from the complexity in how [CDP](https://chromedevtools.github.io/devtools-protocol/) events from the browser and from our own internal event-based system are currently handled, as well as our lack of async support in JavaScript APIs, which introduces race conditions and can lead to intermittent failures. We've been delaying tackling these issues since it requires a substantial rearchitecture of core systems, but rest assured, it's currently our top priority and these issues will be addressed by, hopefully, the next release. If you want to follow along the progress, subscribe to issues [#427](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/issues/427) and [#428](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/issues/428).
```

## New features

### Locator API ([#100](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/issues/100))

The Locator API makes it easier to work with dynamically changing elements. Some of the benefits of using it over existing ways to locate an element (e.g. `Page.$()`) include:
* Helps to write robust tests by finding an element even if the underlying frame navigates.
* Makes it easier to work with dynamic web pages and SPAs built with Svelte, React, Vue, etc.

> * Allows abstracting a page to organize and simplify testing using the Page Object Model (POM) pattern. You can see an example [here](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/blob/v0.4.0/examples/locator_pom.js).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Organizes and simplifies testing by abstracting pages with the Page Object Model (POM) pattern. [An example](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/blob/v0.4.0/examples/locator_pom.js)
```

- Fixed keyboard press of modifier keys (e.g. `Shift`) in `keyboard.down` and `keyboard.up`. ([#325](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/325))

- Fixed `page.content()` so that it no longer panics. ([#327](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/327))

- Fixed `ElementHandle.fill()`. ([#383](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/383))

  Before, it was not filling in the text in the selected input element.

- Fixed `ElementHandle.tap()`. ([#401](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/401))

  Before, it was performing the tap without respecting the vertical coordinate.

- Fixed timeout detection. ([#411](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/411))

  Before this fix, we couldn't detect the timeouts properly. For example if we write a test where we are retrieving the contents of an element that doesn't exist, it used to return an empty string, but now it will raise a timeout error correctly. The current system is still unstable because this fix re-surfaced a data race bug that happens from time to time (happens on frame navigation). Previously reported in [#254](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/issues/254)

## Improvements

> - Permissions can now be granted (such as microphone and camera) to the browser.  ([#314](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/314))

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Permissions, such as microphone and camera, can now be granted to the browser.  ([#314](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/314))
```

>   This grants the new browser window permissions that would then allow tests to use those devices. You can test the change using the example in [examples/grant_permission.js](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/blob/v0.4.0/examples/grant_permission.js)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  This grants the new browser window permissions that would allow tests to use those devices. You can test the change using the example in [examples/grant_permission.js](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/blob/v0.4.0/examples/grant_permission.js)
```

The team is aware that the extension is currently unstable for many users. This stems from the complexity in how [CDP](https://chromedevtools.github.io/devtools-protocol/) events from the browser and from our own internal event-based system are currently handled, as well as our lack of async support in JavaScript APIs, which introduces race conditions and can lead to intermittent failures. We've been delaying tackling these issues since it requires a substantial rearchitecture of core systems, but rest assured, it's currently our top priority and these issues will be addressed by, hopefully, the next release. If you want to follow along the progress, subscribe to issues [#427](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/issues/427) and [#428](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/issues/428).

## New features

### Locator API ([#100](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/issues/100))

The Locator API makes it easier to work with dynamically changing elements. Some of the benefits of using it over existing ways to locate an element (e.g. `Page.$()`) include:

> * Helps to write robust tests by finding an element even if the underlying frame navigates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Helps with writing robust tests by finding an element even if the underlying frame navigates.
```

* Makes it easier to work with dynamic web pages and SPAs built with Svelte, React, Vue, etc.

> * Organizes and simplifies testing by abstracting pages with the Page Object Model (POM) pattern. [An example](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/blob/v0.4.0/examples/locator_pom.js)

Reviewer 2: The Locator API doesn't do this by itself, but makes it easier to use such patterns.

```suggestion
* Enables the use of test abstractions like the Page Object Model (POM) pattern to simplify and organize tests. See [this example](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/blob/v0.4.0/examples/locator_pom.js).
```

- Fixed timeout detection. ([#411](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/411))

  Before this fix, we couldn't detect the timeouts properly. For example if we write a test where we are retrieving the contents of an element that doesn't exist, it used to return an empty string, but now it will raise a timeout error correctly. The current system is still unstable because this fix re-surfaced a data race bug that happens from time to time (happens on frame navigation). Previously reported in [#254](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/issues/254)

## Improvements

- Permissions, such as microphone and camera, can now be granted to the browser.  ([#314](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/314))

  This grants the new browser window permissions that would allow tests to use those devices. You can test the change using the example in [examples/grant_permission.js](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/blob/v0.4.0/examples/grant_permission.js)

- We're also removing the slow-motion option for `Frame.isChecked()` since it doesn't make sense to slow down this sort of check ([#376](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/376))

> - We're working on making xk6-browser available in the k6 Cloud! The feature is still in early testing stages, but we hope to make more announcements about it soon. Stay tuned!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Our log messages are now more concise and user friendlier. ([#429](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/429))

- We're working on making xk6-browser available in the k6 Cloud! The feature is still in early testing stages, but we hope to make more announcements about it soon. Stay tuned!
```

Reviewer: 🤔 

```suggestion
- The error messages are now more concise and user-friendlier. ([#429](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/429))

- We're working on making xk6-browser available in the k6 Cloud! The feature is still in the early testing stages, but we hope to make more announcements about it soon. Stay tuned!
```

Reviewer 2: @ankur22 I think it should be "user-friendlier". User-friendliness is a relative concept, but we made an improvement.

I'm not sure I agree with all of your changes @inancgumus, but maybe we can agree on this:

> Some of our log messages are now more concise and user-friendlier.

I don't think we can say that all of them are, but it's an improvement. So "some of", and "our" instead of "the", as we're not changing e.g. the site logs. And "log messages" instead of "error messages", since there might be some warnings changed there as well; the change wasn't focused on error messages, even though those are the majority.

Reviewer: I agree with "some of" or "most"? Here's my suggestion, but I don't have a strong opinion:

> Most of the log messages are now more concise and user-friendlier. We're still working on improving the rest to make them easy to figure out.
